--- 
title: A Year with Fly and Developer Delight
link: link
layout: post.njk 
date: 2024-01-11
permalink: "posts/a-year-with-fly"
meta_description: My thoughts and impressions after using Fly.io's platform for over a year
tags: ['post'] 
---

Fly.io has been the quickest, and most efficient platform I've used in such a
long time. I've been around the game for a little while now and have been very
used to using a docker workflow both for building applications and, also gaining
access to lab environments. At my security job we would do a local ubuntu or
local kali linux image to run certain scripts.

I've messed around with all the major cloud providers, AWS, GCP, and Azure. I've
used the serverless framework and messed around with kubernetes a bunch even
building a company with kubernetes to begin with. 

When I go about building an application and deploying it a lot of my thought
goes into how is it being packaged. Do I need a binary, just a zipfile with
instructions, etc To that end early on I started using docker since it promised
reproducible builds everywhere and that was really appealing. 

## The Journey

I'd say fly encapsulates the concept of
[GTFOL](https://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=GTFOL) perfectly. So
often would I be at a hackathon or just making a small little tool for my
personal usage and if I wanted to make it available for public usage it was such
a pain. I remember distinctly one 24 hour hackathon I did the summer of 2020
where I had spent 20 hours building my app and had it working perfectly on my
computer, and my teammates laptop all packaged in a docker container. Now I
simply wanted to put that docker container on the cloud and let it be publically
accessible. This seems like a natural progression to me especially with small
projects and beginnings. From there I wanted to use the free GCP credits we got
for the event and put it on their platform. Immediately I was overwhelmed with
the huge amount of documentation, and the cumbersome nature of the user
interface. 10 minutes into it, I had a ton of different tabs open with
documentation and different inceptioned screens on their dashboard. I eventually
got it to work, but it felt like I did it wrong, and I wasn't totally sure I
could recreate. 

### The Kubernetes Rabbithole 

Kubernetes was the next behemoth that I undertook. Kubernetes made a lot of
sense to me conceptually. I felt like I understood the entire thing a lot more
easily than a cloud provider like AWS where there's a bunch of vendor lock-in
terminology. Everything was a pod and that usually translated to a container.
You could network the cluster together, add storage, and expose it to the
public. Ok, this seems promising, and it's a fairly quick translation over from
Docker images. There were also operators and custom resource definitions, but I
didn't get too far into that side. I ended up starting a company in the fall of
2021, and we structured most of our infrastructure using k8s with an EKS cluster.
K8s still has a place in my heart as a system that makes a lot of sense, but it
was just too much overhead to manage. There was a decent learning curve for
other members of the team who weren't familiar, and I was spending a lot of the
time debugging deployments. At such a small scale it just didn't make sense to
have the overhead. We didn't need to scale that much, and the time I spent
managing the cluster was probably the same I needed to learn the managed
services within AWS itself. 

## The Promised Land

Flashforward to 2023 where I'm working on building an LLM based chatbot on
discord at Plastic Labs. The application was super simple. Just a few python
scripts in a folder. The docker container was simple too just a python
environment that installed the dependencies with `pip` and ran the entrypoint
script. I got the bot running locally, but couldn't just keep my laptop running
at all hours, so I wanted to deploy it the cloud. I didn't want to make the
mistake of setting up a cluster again as most of the team wasn't technical, and
it was just overkill for one container. I started messing around with AWS's
Elastic Container Service and going through their documentation, but everything
just felt cumbersome, and I was setting up a bunch of different resources and
IAM idenities all to get a single container running. 

I decided to do some research on other platforms and remembered seeing Fly.io. I
had been getting ads for their platform for a few years now and decided to give
it a try to see how well it worked. They advertised themselves as simply running
docker containers as VMs. Okay that seems simple enough for my needs. I created
and account and opened up their documentation. The first thing that struck me
was that they had something called a [speedrun](https://fly.io/docs/speedrun/)
mode. Now years of looking at READMEs and getting started guides made me a
little skeptical, but I was immediately proven wrong. Basically just the `fly
launch` command was all I ran, and I had my app up and running, no fuss. A few
hours of research and trying to get up and running with ECS felt like such a
waste after the 2-minute process of getting a fly vm up and running. 

This is what I've been looking for! No fancy bells and whistles and weird
re-skinnings of open source tools. Just take my docker image and deploy it
somewhere publically accessible. The product spoke for itself, and I loved it.
Over the last year I've become a huge stan for Fly. Their developer blogs are
great and even if they aren't relevant at all to anything I'm working on they,
are always fun to read. They released [Gossip Glomers](https://fly.io/dist-sys/)
which were really fun. The community forum was super welcoming and fast to
respond to questions I had. They just felt like they were made for an engineer
to use. Not so some sales person could go to an executive at a large corporation
who forces the engineers to use a product that they don't want to use. 

Fly was amazing, but then it kept getting better.

- They exposed their logging and made it super easy to ship logs
- They gave us free sentry error tracking for a year
- And now they are integrating with supabase for managed databases. 

Fly is the platform I wanted as a tinkerer in high school and college, and I'm
incredibly excited to see where it goes from here. 


