---
title: Creative Communities in Engineering
layout: post.njk
date: 2022-07-15
permalink: "posts/creative-communities-in-engineering/"
meta_description: Creative Communities in engineering
tags: ["post", "creativity", "hackathons"]
---

I first got into technology and engineering when I was introduced to the world
of hackathons in high school. The idea of getting together with a community of
like-minded people who just like to tinker and sharing what everyone made really
exciting me. Where I was from I could not really just talk about stuff I was
interested in that much, so being able to share my thoughts and experiences
really blew my mind and got me hooked. 

I started going to as many hackathons as I could convince my parents to drive me
too. I was waiting for once I went to college and could really in-grain myself
into this community. But after entering college I started to notice that the
tinkerer community is a lot more diverse and divided than I thought. Hackathons
were also starting to wane from their original vibe. They became more about the
competition than the curiosity. More and more "how can I make projects
guaranteed to get the most wins and impress specific companies". I'm not here to
criticize that kind of thing, but it just wasn't what originally interested me.
I started to see little "just for fun" projects at any software hackathon. I
started returning to online for sharing and seeing experiments and pure hobbyist
projects.

A friend and I were talking about this one day, and we realized there really
isn't a large community for people who tinkered with software. Now there were
hackathons and smaller more specialized clubs, but there wasn't really just one
place to share things you've made. Most of the discussion was around how to land
a job or practicing for interviews. Definitely useful information and glad that
we talked about it, but I still wanted to just share experiences about the
entire field. However, engineering is a broad field and this really only
encapsulated my experience with the software part of the school. In the general
engineering college we had several makerspaces. These places were teeming with
creative energy and a lot of curiosity for the craft of making things. They were
structured as so: large physical spaces with tons of tools, heavy machinery, and
parts that any student could use for practically any project they wanted. There
were also teams of Peer Instructors whose sole role was to hang out and help
students. Whether they needed ideas of how to solve a problem, use a tool, or
just come up with an idea you could always rely on them. However, that support
wasn't limited to just the peer instructors, a lot of the time there were off
duy peer instructors working on their projects or just regular students who were
still more than happy to help. These were some of the most supportive spaces on
campus and great places to just hangout and see people working on cool things.

When I saw this dichotomy between the physical makers and software makers I
immediately started to question what led to the differences in their
communities. Was it the fact that individuals being right next to each other led
to a natural curiosity about what others were working on? Was it that the
easiest place to go to for help was peers? With software a lot of the time just
googling an issue can lead to the fastest answer so unless it was the same
assignment I rarely saw students talk about how to make something. I'm sure it
was a mix of both of those factors and probably a bunch of other things I
couldn't see, but regardless it was clear that there was a really strong culture
of creation in these spaces that I could not find online or physically around
software. In one of my clubs we had a roundtable discussion about potentially
making a makerspace for software oriented folks, but we always ran in circle
around what exactly that meant. What would a space for software include besides
just desks and comfy chairs? A couple of ideas were thrown around: mixed reality
devices and HPC access were the usual suspects. However, it was quickly brought
up that high performance computing access really wasn't necessary considering
how every major cloud provider had an education offerring and there are a
plethora of other ways to get free credits for personal projects. So a software
oriented makerspace never moved forward a lot while I was involved. We made an
attempt at creating a discord community around, but it didn't gain a lot of
tractions and quickly became more of a space for people to sell their startup
ideas or ask for interview help.

I said at the beginning of this piece that I got into tech because of
hackathons, but if I were to analyze that a little more deeply I would say the
creative potential of software is what captivated me. Hackathons were just the
place I found it. Nowadays it's hard to find that with collegiate hackathons
being sponsor driven and other hackathons being specific in nature
often to specific problem statement or requiring the use of a specific (often
web3) technology. A friend of mine criticized my pessimistic view by saying I
shouldn't need a hackathon to create, and he is right. But what I was looking
for wasn't an excuse to make, but rather a community to have fun and share my
work with.

Even now, after college, I have struggled to find anything like that. I've
messed around with joining discord communities, but they were often fine
tunely focused on a specific technology or just inactive. Hackernews and
similar forums were cool places to discover projects and find cool articles, but
never felt (personally) like a place to ask specific questions or just workshop
ideas. Although that's probably more of a personal gripe with forum style
platforms.
I'm not saying there isn't a community like the one I tried to describe in this
piece, just that I haven't quite found it yet, and not sure how one would be
created either.
